<!-- Copyright 2000-2025 JetBrains s.r.o. and contributors. Use of this source code is governed by the Apache 2.0 license. -->

# Live Templates Configuration File

<show-structure for="chapter" depth="4"/>

<link-summary>Live templates configuration file contains all the information about templates provided by the plugin.</link-summary>

This page lists and describes all the elements and attributes used in live templates configuration files.

## Configuration Structure Overview

<include from="snippets.topic" element-id="descriptorDocumentationProviderNote"/>

[//]: # (GENERATED CONTENT START)

[//]: # (This content is generated by generate_descriptor_pages.main.kts script.)
[//]: # (DO NOT EDIT IT MANUALLY)

- [`<templateSet>`](#templateSet)
  - [`<template>`](#templateSet__template)
    - [`<variable>`](#templateSet__template__variable)
    - [`<context>`](#templateSet__template__context)
      - [`<option>`](#templateSet__template__context__option)

## `templateSet`
{#templateSet}

<tldr>

**Reference:** [Live Templates](live_templates.md)
, [Live Templates (IntelliJ IDEA Web Help)](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/settings-live-templates.html)

</tldr>

The live templates file root element.

{type="narrow"}
Required
: **yes**


{type="narrow"}
Attributes
:
- `group` _(optional)_<br/>
  Name of the template set group, which is displayed in <ui-path>Settings | Editor | Live Templates</ui-path> list.
  If the group name is not provided, then templates' XML file name is used by default.
- `replace` _(optional)_<br/>

    Name of a template group that this template set replaces.
    Templates from the replaced group are removed and are skipped in settings and completion.

Children
:
  - [`<template>`](#templateSet__template)

### `template`
{#templateSet__template}

Describes a template.

{type="narrow"}
Required
: no


{type="narrow"}
Attributes
:
- `id` _(optional)_<br/>
  Optional template identifier.
- `name` _(**required**)_<br/>
  The template abbreviation typed by users in the editor to expand it.
  The abbreviation must be unique in the group containing the template.
- `value` _(**required**)_<br/>
  The text that the template is expanded to.<br/>
  It may contain plain text and reference [variables](#templateSet__template__variable) in the format `$VARIABLE_NAME$`.
  To escape a dollar sign `$` in the template text, use `$$`.
- `resource-bundle` _(optional)_<br/>
  Message bundle containing the template description specified by `key`.
- `key` _(optional)_<br/>
  The key of the template description provided in a message bundle defined by `resource-bundle`.
  Description is used in the UI.
  Overrides the value of `description`.
- `description` _(optional)_<br/>
  The template description used in the UI.
  It is ignored if the description is provided with `resource-bundle` and `key`.
- `shortcut` _(optional)_<br/>
  Defines a character that expands the template.
  Allowed values:
    - `SPACE` - space key
    - `TAB` - tab key
    - `ENTER` - enter key
    - `CUSTOM` - key defined in the <control>By default expand with</control> field in <ui-path>Settings | Editor | Live Templates</ui-path>
    - `NONE` - disables expanding with a key
- `toReformat` _(optional)_<br/>
  Defines whether the inserted code should be reformatted according to the language code style.<br/>
  Default value: `false`.
- `toShortenFQNames` _(optional)_<br/>
  Defines whether qualified names in the expanded code should be shortened,
  for example, fully qualified names of Java classes are imported.<br/>
  Shortening qualified names is performed in implementations of [`TemplateOptionalProcessor`](%gh-ic%/platform/analysis-impl/src/com/intellij/codeInsight/template/impl/TemplateOptionalProcessor.java).<br/>
  Default value: `false`.
- `useStaticImport` _(optional)_<br/>
  Defines whether symbols used in the expanded code should be statically imported, if possible.<br/>
  Importing symbols statically is performed in implementations of [`TemplateOptionalProcessor`](%gh-ic%/platform/analysis-impl/src/com/intellij/codeInsight/template/impl/TemplateOptionalProcessor.java).<br/>
  Default value: `false`.
- `deactivated` _(optional)_<br/>

    Allows deactivating the template.
    Deactivated templates are listed in the UI and can be activated by users.<br/>
    Default value: `false`.

Children
:
  - [`<context>`](#templateSet__template__context)
  - [`<variable>`](#templateSet__template__variable)

#### `variable`
{#templateSet__template__variable}

<tldr>

**Reference:** [Template Variables](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/edit-template-variables-dialog.html)

</tldr>

Defines a variable to be used in the template `value`.
A single template can provide multiple variables.

The order of the variables determines the order in which the IDE will switch between
the corresponding input fields when the template is expanded.

{type="narrow"}
Required
: no


{type="narrow"}
Attributes
:
- `name` _(optional)_<br/>
  The variable name that is referenced in the [`<template>`](#templateSet__template) element's `value` attribute.
- `expression` _(optional)_<br/>
  Expression to calculate the value of the corresponding template input field automatically.<br/>
  The expression may contain the following constructs:
    - string constants in escaped double quotes, for example, `&quot;value&quot;`
    - names of other variables defined in the template, for example, `ANOTHER_VAR`
    - functions ([built-in](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/template-variables.html#predefined_functions) or [custom](creating_live_template_functions.md)) with possible arguments
- `defaultValue` _(optional)_<br/>
  The default value for the corresponding input field of the expanded template
  if the expression does not give any result after calculation.<br/>
  It can refer to other live template variables, for example, `ANOTHER_VAR`.<br/>
  To define the default value as a literal, enclose it in escaped quotation marks, for example, `&quot;value&quot;`.
- `alwaysStopAt` _(optional)_<br/>

    If `true`, the IDE will always stop at the corresponding input of the expanded template.<br/>
    If `false`, the IDE will skip the corresponding input of the expanded template if the input value is defined.<br/>
    Default value: `false`.

Examples
:
- Empty variable allowing to provide a value manually by a user:
    ```xml
    <variable
        name="MY_VAR"
        expression=""
        defaultValue=""
        alwaysStopAt="true"/>
    ```
- Variable inserting the content of the clipboard,
and referencing the `PLACEHOLDER` variable if the clipboard content is empty:
    ```xml
    <variable
        name="PLACEHOLDER"
        expression=""
        defaultValue=""
        alwaysStopAt="true"/>
    <variable
        name="MY_VAR"
        expression="clipboard()"
        defaultValue="PLACEHOLDER"
        alwaysStopAt="true"/>
    ```
- Variable invoking completion and providing the `myValue` value if the completion doesn't provide any result:
    ```xml
    <variable
        name="MY_VAR"
        expression="complete()"
        defaultValue="&quot;myValue&quot;"
        alwaysStopAt="true"/>
    ```

#### `context`
{#templateSet__template__context}

Defines a mapping of a context type (for example, a Java method, a Markdown file) to applicability of the template
in this context type.

{type="narrow"}
Required
: no

Children
:
  - [`<option>`](#templateSet__template__context__option)

Example
:
  ```xml
  <context>
    <option name="JAVA_CODE" value="true"/>
    <option name="JAVA_COMMENT" value="false"/>
    <option name="JAVA_STRING" value="false"/>
  </context>
  ```

##### `option`
{#templateSet__template__context__option}

An entry specifying whether a given context type defined by the
`name` attribute is applicable for the template.

{type="narrow"}
Required
: no


{type="narrow"}
Attributes
:
- `name` _(**required**)_<br/>
  The context type name.<br/>
  To implement a custom context type, see the
  [context type implementation](providing_live_templates.md#implement-templatecontexttype)
  tutorial.
- `value` _(**required**)_<br/>

    A boolean value determining whether the context type defined with the
    [`<option>`](#templateSet__template__context__option) element's
    `name`
    attribute is applicable for the template.<br/>
    As context types are hierarchical, the `false` value can be used when the parent context type is applicable,
    and it is required to disable the applicability of more specific child context types.

[//]: # (GENERATED CONTENT END)

<include from="snippets.topic" element-id="missingContent"/>
