[//]: # (title: Plugin Configuration File)

<!-- Copyright 2000-2022 JetBrains s.r.o. and contributors. Use of this source code is governed by the Apache 2.0 license. -->

The <path>plugin.xml</path> configuration file contains all the information about the plugin and all registered extensions, actions, listeners, etc.
Sections below describe all the elements in detail.

[//]: # (TODO: add disclaimer, that even if the element is required, it may be skipped in the dependency configuration files.)

[//]: # (TODO: collect what can be generated by Gradle and link)

## Element: `idea-plugin`
{id="idea-plugin"}

The <path>plugin.xml</path> file root element.

{style="narrow"}
Required
: Yes

Attributes
:
- `url` _(optional)_<br/>
  The link to the plugin homepage displayed on the plugin page in the [JetBrains Marketplace](https://plugins.jetbrains.com).<br/>
  Example: `https://example.com/my-plugin-site`

Children
:
- [`<actions>`](#idea-plugin__actions)
- [`<application-components>`](#idea-plugin__application-components)
- [`<applicationListeners>`](#idea-plugin__applicationListeners)
- [`<change-notes>`](#idea-plugin__change-notes)
- [`<depends>`](#idea-plugin__depends)
- [`<description>`](#idea-plugin__description)
- [`<extensions>`](#idea-plugin__extensions)
- [`<extensionPoints>`](#idea-plugin__extensionPoints)
- [`<id>`](#idea-plugin__id)
- [`<idea-version>`](#idea-plugin__idea-version)
- [`<module-components>`](#idea-plugin__module-components)
- [`<name>`](#idea-plugin__name)
- [`<product-descriptor>`](#idea-plugin__product-descriptor)
- [`<project-components>`](#idea-plugin__project-components)
- [`<projectListeners>`](#idea-plugin__projectListeners)
- [`<resource-bundle>`](#idea-plugin__resource-bundle)
- [`<vendor>`](#idea-plugin__vendor)
- [`<version>`](#idea-plugin__version)

### Element: `id`
{id="idea-plugin__id"}

A unique identifier of the plugin.
It should be a fully qualified name including namespace to not collide with existing plugins.

**The identifier value cannot be changed between the plugin versions.**

{style="narrow"}
Required
: No<br/>
**It is highly recommended to set.**

Default value
: Value of the [`<name>`](#idea-plugin__name) element.<br/>

Example
: `<id>com.example.my-framework-support</id>`

### Element: `name`
{id="idea-plugin__name"}

The public plugin name using Title Cases.

See the [naming guidelines](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/plugin-overview-page.html#plugin-name) in the JetBrains Marketplace documentation.

{style="narrow"}
Required
: Yes

Example
: `<name>My Framework Support</name>`

### Element: `version`
{id="idea-plugin__version"}

The plugin version displayed in the <control>Plugins</control> settings dialog and in the JetBrains Marketplace plugin page.
Plugins uploaded to the JetBrains Marketplace must follow the [semantic versioning](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/semver.html).

{style="narrow"}
Required
: Yes

Example
: `<version>1.3.18</version>`

### Element: `vendor`
{id="idea-plugin__vendor"}

The vendor name or organization ID (if created) in the <control>Plugins</control> settings dialog and in the JetBrains Marketplace plugin page.

{style="narrow"}
Required
: Yes

Attributes
:
- `url` _(optional)_<br/>
  The link to the vendor's homepage.<br/>
  Example: `https://example.com/my-company`
- `email` _(optional)_<br/>
  The vendor's email address.<br/>
  Example: `contact@example.com`

Examples
:
- `<vendor url="..." email="...">John Smith</vendor>`
- `<vendor url="..." email="...">My Company</vendor>`

See also: [Contacts and resources
](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/plugin-overview-page.html#contacts-and-resources) in the JetBrains Marketplace documentation.

### Element: `product-descriptor`
{id="idea-plugin__product-descriptor"}

[Paid](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/build-and-market) or [Freemium](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/freemium.html) plugin descriptor.
See the [required parameters](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/add-required-parameters.html) for more details.<br/>

{style="narrow"}
Required
: Only for paid or freemium plugins<br/>
**Do not add `<product-descriptor>` element in a free plugin.**

### Element: `idea-version`
{id="idea-plugin__idea-version"}

Defines the IntelliJ-based IDEs version compatibility range.

See how to correctly specify [version ranges](build_number_ranges.md).

{style="narrow"}
Required
: Yes<br/>
The element can be skipped in the source <path>plugin.xml</path> file if the Gradle [patchPluginXml](tools_gradle_intellij_plugin.md#patchpluginxml-task) task is enabled.

Attributes
:
- `since-build` _(required)_<br/>
  The lowest IDE version compatible with the plugin.<br/>
  Examples: `213`, `213.56`, `IU-213.94.11`
- `until-build` _(optional)_<br/>
  The highest IDE version compatible with the plugin.
  Undefined value declares compatibility with all the IDEs since the version specified by the `since-build` (also with the future builds what may cause incompatibility errors).<br/>
  Examples: `221.*`, `221.56.*`, `IU-221.*`

Examples
:
- `<idea-version since-build="213.7172"/>`
- `<idea-version since-build="213" until-build="221.*"/>`

### Element: `description`
{id="idea-plugin__description"}

The plugin description displayed on the JetBrains Marketplace plugin page and in the IDE Plugin Manager.

Simple HTML elements, like text formatting, paragraphs, lists, etc., are allowed and must be wrapped into `<![CDATA[` ... `]]>` section.

See the [description guidelines](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/plugin-overview-page.html#plugin-description) in the JetBrains Marketplace documentation.

{style="narrow"}
Required
: Yes<br/>
TODO: can be skipped if Gradle handles it

Example
: TODO

### Element: `change-notes`
{id="idea-plugin__change-notes"}

A short summary of new features, bugfixes, and changes provided with the latest plugin version.
Change notes are displayed on the Marketplace plugin page and in the IDE Plugin Manager.

Simple HTML elements, like text formatting, paragraphs, lists, etc., are allowed and must be wrapped into `<![CDATA[` ... `]]>` section.

TODO: how gradle plugin helps

{style="narrow"}
Example
: TODO

See also: [Change notes](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/plugin-overview-page.html#change-notes) in the JetBrains Marketplace documentation.

### Element: `depends`
{id="idea-plugin__depends"}

Specifies a dependency on another plugin.
A single `<idea-plugin>` element can contain multiple `<depends>` elements.

{style="narrow"}
Attributes
:
- `optional` _(optional)_<br/>
  Boolean value defining whether the dependency is optional to load the plugin in the IDE.
  Default value: `false`.<br/>
  If the dependency plugin is not installed in the current IDE, and:
    - `optional="true"` - the plugin will be loaded.
    - `optional="false"` - the plugin will not be loaded.
- `config-file` _(optional)_<br/>
  Relative path to an [additional configuration file](#additional-plugin-configuration-files), loaded only if the dependency plugin is installed in the current IDE.<br/>
  Example: `subdir/dependency.xml`

Examples
:
- Required plugin dependency:<br/>
  `<depends>com.example.dependency-plugin</depends>`
- Optional plugin dependency:<br/>
  `<depends optional="true">`<br/>`com.example.dependency-plugin`<br/>`</depends>`
- Required plugin dependency with additional configuration:<br/>
  `<depends config-file="depconfig.xml">`<br/>`com.example.dependency-plugin`<br/>`</depends>`
- Optional plugin dependency with additional configuration:<br/>
  `<depends optional="true" config-file="depconfig.xml">`<br/>`com.example.dependency-plugin`<br/>`</depends>`

### Element: `resource-bundle`
{id="idea-plugin__resource-bundle"}

A resource bundle to be used with message key attributes in extension declarations, and for [action and group localization](basic_action_system.md#localizing-actions-and-groups).
A single `<idea-plugin>` element can contain multiple `<resource-bundle>` elements.

{style="narrow"}
Example
: To load the content of <path>messages/MyBundle.properties</path> bundle, declare:<br/>
`<resource-bundle>messages.MyBundle</resource-bundle>`

### Element: `applicationListeners`
{id="idea-plugin__applicationListeners"}

TODO

{style="narrow"}
Default value
: TODO

Example
: TODO

### Element: `projectListeners`
{id="idea-plugin__projectListeners"}

TODO

{style="narrow"}
Default value
: TODO

Example
: TODO

### Element: `actions`
{id="idea-plugin__actions"}

TODO

Additional information about configuring `<actions>` is available in the [Actions](basic_action_system.md#registering-actions) section.

{style="narrow"}
Default value
: TODO

Example
: TODO

### Element: `extensions`
{id="idea-plugin__extensions"}

TODO

{style="narrow"}
Default value
: TODO

Example
: TODO

### Element: `extensionPoints`
{id="idea-plugin__extensionPoints"}

[Extension points](plugin_extension_points.md) defined by the plugin.

{style="narrow"}
Children
: [`<extensionPoint>`](#idea-plugin__extensionPoints__extensionPoint)

#### Element: `extensionPoint`
{id="idea-plugin__extensionPoints__extensionPoint"}

A single extension point entry of the [`<extensionPoints>`](#idea-plugin__extensionPoints) defined by the plugin.

{style="narrow"}
Attributes
:
- `name` _(`name` or `qualifiedName` is required)_<br/>
  The extension point name that should be unique in the scope of the plugin, e.g., `myExtension`.
  The fully qualified name of the extension point is built at runtime by prepending the value of the `name` attribute with the plugin [`<id>`](#idea-plugin__id) + `.` prefix.
  Only one of the `name` and `qualifiedName` attributes can be specified.<br/>
  Example: when the `name` is  `myExtension` and plugin ID is `com.example.myplugin`, the fully qualified name of the EP will be `com.example.myplugin.myExtension`.
- `qualifiedName` _(`name` or `qualifiedName` is required)_<br/>
  The fully qualified name of the extension point.
  It should be unique between different plugins, and it is recommended to include a plugin ID to guarantee uniqueness, e.g., `com.example.myplugin.myExtension`.
  Only one of the `name` and `qualifiedName` attributes can be specified.
- `interface` _(`interface` or `beanClass` is required)_<br/>
  The fully qualified name of the interface to be implemented for extending plugin's functionality.
  Only one of the `interface` and `beanClass` attributes can be specified.
  See [](plugin_extension_points.md) for more information.
- `beanClass` _(`interface` or `beanClass` is required)_<br/>
  The fully qualified name of the extension point bean class providing additional information to the plugin.
  Only one of the `interface` and `beanClass` attributes can be specified.
  See [](plugin_extension_points.md) for more information.
- `dynamic` _(optional)_<br/>
  Boolean value defining whether the extension point meets the requirements to be [dynamic](plugin_extension_points.md#dynamic-extension-points), which is a prerequisite for [dynamic plugins](dynamic_plugins.md).
  Default value: `false`.
- `area` _(optional)_<br/>
  The scope in which the [extension](plugin_extensions.md) is instantiated.
  Possible values:
    - `IDEA_APPLICATION` _(default)_
    - `IDEA_PROJECT`
    - `IDEA_MODULE`

    It is not recommended to use non-default value.

Children
: [`<with>`](#idea-plugin__extensionPoints__extensionPoint__with)

##### Element: `with`
{id="idea-plugin__extensionPoints__extensionPoint__with"}

Specifies the required parent type for class names provided in extension point tags or attributes.
A single [`<extensionPoint>`](#idea-plugin__extensionPoints__extensionPoint) element can contain multiple `<with>` elements.

{style="narrow"}
Attributes
:
- `tag` _(`tag` or `attribute` is required)_<br/>
  The name of the tag holding the fully qualified name of the class which parent type will be limited by the type provided in the `implements` attribute.
  Only one of the `tag` and `attribute` attributes can be specified.
- `attribute` _(`tag` or `attribute` is required)_<br/>
  The name of the attribute holding the fully qualified name of the class which parent type will be limited by the type provided in the `implements` attribute.
  Only one of the `tag` and `attribute` attributes can be specified.
- `implements` _(required)_<br/>
  The fully qualified name of the parent type limiting the type provided in the place specified by `tag` or `attribute`.

Example
:
Extension point which restricts the type provided in a `myClass` attribute to be an instance of `com.example.ParentType`, and the type provided in a `someClass` element to be an instance of `java.lang.Comparable`:
  ```xml
  <extensionPoint
      name="myExtension"
      beanClass="com.example.MyExtension">
    <with
        attribute="myClass"
        implements="com.example.ParentType"/>
    <with
        tag="someClass"
        implements="java.lang.Comparable"/>
  </extensionPoint>
  ```
  The implementing extension declaration could be defined as:
  ```xml
  <myExtension ...
      myClass="com.example.MyCustomType">
    <someClass>com.example.MyComparable</someClass>
  </myExtension>
  ```
  where:
  - `com.example.MyCustomType` must be a subtype of `com.example.ParentType`
  - `com.example.MyComparable` must be a subtype of `java.lang.Comparable`

### Element: `application-components`
{id="idea-plugin__application-components"}

TODO

{style="narrow"}
Deprecated
: Yes

Default value
: TODO

Example
: TODO

### Element: `project-components`
{id="idea-plugin__project-components"}

TODO

{style="narrow"}
Deprecated
: Yes

Default value
: TODO

Example
: TODO

### Element: `module-components`
{id="idea-plugin__module-components"}

TODO

{style="narrow"}
Deprecated
: Yes

Default value
: TODO

Example
: TODO


## Additional Plugin Configuration Files

[//]: # (TODO: even if the element is required, it may be skipped in the dependency configuration files. refer to `<depends>`)




When using Gradle, a number of metadata elements will be provided at build time by [`patchPluginXml` task](gradle_guide.md#patching-the-plugin-configuration-file).

## Useful Resources

Please make sure to follow the guidelines from [Plugin Overview page](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/docs/marketplace/plugin-overview-page.html) for an optimal presentation of your plugin on JetBrains Marketplace. The _Busy Plugin Developers. Episode 2_ discusses [5 tips for optimizing JetBrains Marketplace plugin page](https://youtu.be/oB1GA9JeeiY?t=44) in more datail.

See also [](marketing.md) about widgets and badges.
